README.md, before:

[![docs](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/pkgdown.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/pkgdown.yaml)
[![build](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/rcmd.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/rcmd.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/JGCRI/rfasst/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=2IBODRZKVF)](https://codecov.io/gh/JGCRI/rfasst)

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Contents"></a>Contents
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

- [Key Links](#KeyLinks)
- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Citation](#Citation)
- [Installation Guide](#InstallGuide)
- [How-to guide](#howto) 
- [Publications](#Publications)

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="KeyLinks"></a>Key Links
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

- Github: https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst
- Webpage: https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Introduction"></a>Introduction
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

`rfasst` reports a consistent range of adverse health and agricultural effects attributable to air pollution for any scenario run by the Global Change Analysis Model ([GCAM](http://www.globalchange.umd.edu/gcam/)), by replicating the calculations of the air quality reduced-form model [TM5-FASST]( https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/tm5-fasst-global-atmospheric-source-receptor-model-rapid-impact-analysis-emission-changes-air).


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Citation"></a>Citation
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="InstallGuide"></a>Installation Guide
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

1. Download and install:
    - R (https://www.r-project.org/)
    - R studio (https://www.rstudio.com/)  
    
    
2. Open R studio:

```r
install.packages(“devtools”)
devtools::install_github(“JGCRI/rfasst”)
```


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="keyfunctions"></a> How to guides
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

The package consists of a set of functions divided in four different modules:
- Module 1. Emissions re-scaling: Process emissions by GCAM-region and re-scale them to TM5-FASST regions, and make some additional pollutant-related adjustments. More details in the [Module1 emissions](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module1_emissions.html) page. 
- Module 2. Concentration: Estimate fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone (O3) concentration levels (measured by different indicators) for each region. More details in the [Module2 concentration](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module2_concentration.html) page. 
- Module 3. Health: Report adverse health effects attributable to exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone (O3; M6M). More details in the [Module3 health](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module3_health.html) page. 
- Module 4. Agriculture: Estimate adverse agricultural impacts associated to ozone exposure, including relative yield losses (RYLs) and production and revenue losses. More details in the [Module4 agriculture](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module4_agriculture.html) page. 

In addition, the package includes some default mapping files and default values, that are read by the different functions. These can be easily changed by the user in the `/R/constants.R` file. Some of these constants include:
- Years to be analyzed: In the `all_years` vector, the user can select the years to be included in the analysis. All the avialble years are '2005','2010','2020','2030','2040','2050','2060','2070','2080','2090','2100'.It is no possible to add any other year, but they can be reduced if desired (for example to reduce computation time).
- GCAM crop categories to be included in the analysis
- Shares to allocate emissions between Russia Eastern (RUE) and Russia Western (RUS)
- Coefficients and/or counterfactual values exposure-response functions applied to estimate adverse health and agricultural impacts.
- Median values for the health impact economic assessment (Value of Statistical Life)
- Other


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Publications"></a>Publications
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

Previous to the development of this package, different studies have combined the use of GCAM and TM5-FASST:

- Sampedro, J., Smith, S.J., Arto, I., González-Eguino, M., Markandya, A., Mulvaney, K.M., Pizarro-Irizar, C. and Van Dingenen, R., 2020. Health co-benefits and mitigation costs as per the Paris Agreement under different technological pathways for energy supply. Environment international, 136, p.105513.

- Markandya, A., Sampedro, J., Smith, S.J., Van Dingenen, R., Pizarro-Irizar, C., Arto, I. and González-Eguino, M., 2018. Health co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation costs of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study. The Lancet Planetary Health, 2(3), pp.e126-e133.

- Sampedro, J., Waldhoff, S.T., Van de Ven, D.J., Pardo, G., Van Dingenen, R., Arto, I., Del Prado, A. and Sanz, M.J., 2020. Future impacts of ozone driven damages on agricultural systems. Atmospheric Environment, 231, p.117538.

Commit message:

Change readme file: add git clone repo

README.md, after:

[![docs](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/pkgdown.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/pkgdown.yaml)
[![build](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/rcmd.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst/actions/workflows/rcmd.yml)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/JGCRI/rfasst/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=2IBODRZKVF)](https://codecov.io/gh/JGCRI/rfasst)

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Contents"></a>Contents
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

- [Key Links](#KeyLinks)
- [Introduction](#Introduction)
- [Citation](#Citation)
- [Installation Guide](#InstallGuide)
- [How-to guide](#howto) 
- [Publications](#Publications)

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="KeyLinks"></a>Key Links
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

- Github: https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst
- Webpage: https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/

<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Introduction"></a>Introduction
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

`rfasst` reports a consistent range of adverse health and agricultural effects attributable to air pollution for any scenario run by the Global Change Analysis Model ([GCAM](http://www.globalchange.umd.edu/gcam/)), by replicating the calculations of the air quality reduced-form model [TM5-FASST]( https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/tm5-fasst-global-atmospheric-source-receptor-model-rapid-impact-analysis-emission-changes-air).


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Citation"></a>Citation
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="InstallGuide"></a>Installation Guide
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

1. Download and install:
    - R (https://www.r-project.org/)
    - R studio (https://www.rstudio.com/)  
    - (For cloning the repo) Git (https://git-scm.com/downloads) 
    
    
2. Clone the repositoryto your local machine:
    - Git bash in your working directory (righ click-> "Git Bash Here")
    - In the Git console type: 
```r
git clone https://github.com/JGCRI/rfasst.git
```

3. Open the Rproject (rfasst.Rproj):
    - In the Rstudio menu, click "Build -> Install and restart" (Ctrl+Shift+B)


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="keyfunctions"></a> How to guides
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

The package consists of a set of functions divided in four different modules:
- Module 1. Emissions re-scaling: Process emissions by GCAM-region and re-scale them to TM5-FASST regions, and make some additional pollutant-related adjustments. More details in the [Module1 emissions](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module1_emissions.html) page. 
- Module 2. Concentration: Estimate fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone (O3) concentration levels (measured by different indicators) for each region. More details in the [Module2 concentration](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module2_concentration.html) page. 
- Module 3. Health: Report adverse health effects attributable to exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and ozone (O3; M6M). More details in the [Module3 health](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module3_health.html) page. 
- Module 4. Agriculture: Estimate adverse agricultural impacts associated to ozone exposure, including relative yield losses (RYLs) and production and revenue losses. More details in the [Module4 agriculture](https://jgcri.github.io/rfasst/articles/Module4_agriculture.html) page. 

In addition, the package includes some default mapping files and default values, that are read by the different functions. These can be easily changed by the user in the `/R/constants.R` file. Some of these constants include:
- Years to be analyzed: In the `all_years` vector, the user can select the years to be included in the analysis. All the avialble years are '2005','2010','2020','2030','2040','2050','2060','2070','2080','2090','2100'.It is no possible to add any other year, but they can be reduced if desired (for example to reduce computation time).
- GCAM crop categories to be included in the analysis
- Shares to allocate emissions between Russia Eastern (RUE) and Russia Western (RUS)
- Coefficients and/or counterfactual values exposure-response functions applied to estimate adverse health and agricultural impacts.
- Median values for the health impact economic assessment (Value of Statistical Life)
- Other


<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>
# <a name="Publications"></a>Publications
<!-- ------------------------>
<!-- ------------------------>

[Back to Contents](#Contents)

Previous to the development of this package, different studies have combined the use of GCAM and TM5-FASST:

- Sampedro, J., Smith, S.J., Arto, I., González-Eguino, M., Markandya, A., Mulvaney, K.M., Pizarro-Irizar, C. and Van Dingenen, R., 2020. Health co-benefits and mitigation costs as per the Paris Agreement under different technological pathways for energy supply. Environment international, 136, p.105513.

- Markandya, A., Sampedro, J., Smith, S.J., Van Dingenen, R., Pizarro-Irizar, C., Arto, I. and González-Eguino, M., 2018. Health co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation costs of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study. The Lancet Planetary Health, 2(3), pp.e126-e133.

- Sampedro, J., Waldhoff, S.T., Van de Ven, D.J., Pardo, G., Van Dingenen, R., Arto, I., Del Prado, A. and Sanz, M.J., 2020. Future impacts of ozone driven damages on agricultural systems. Atmospheric Environment, 231, p.117538.
